We want to learn more about the DAX basics,
let's do this in the next videos.
So here we are in the DIM-AgeGroup table and I selected the column that we just created with that two
concatenate formulas.
Now if we look at the syntax of such a DAX formula, we can see that the first part, so in front of
the equals sign is simply the name of that formula
and by that, the name of the column in case of a calculated column which we have right here and which
we'll talk about in the next videos.
Now after the equals sign which is right here, you can find the function,
in that case the concatenate
and here we have the reference,
in that case it's a column reference.
Now we could keep talking about the syntax and how such a formula works but I think it makes more sense
if we now take a look at the official documentation of DAX formula because this will allow you to see
how many formulas we actually have and for how many areas we can apply those formulas,
because of that, let's change to the official documentation right now.
So this is the official DAX function reference documentation of Microsoft
and if you look at the first sentence, you can see that we have more than 200 functions used in DAX formulas
which is quite a lot. To get a better overview of that,
you can click onto that
arrow right here
and then you can see that you have these functions categorized to different topics.
So you have date and time functions, time intelligence, mathematical functions, other functions, statistical
functions and many more.
As we cannot cover all of those topics throughout that course, I think it makes sense if we just take a look
at a basic formula and see what else we can do to get a basic understanding of the DAX formulas.
Now let's start with the date and time functions maybe, if we click right here
and here we have different date and time functions for different topics.
Now a good thing that we could do is for instance a calendar function,
let's click that
and this function allows us to simply create a calendar in Power BI.
I think this is a good idea
and if you look down at the syntax, you can simply see that we have to write the calendar function,
then the start date and the end date
but if you scroll down a little bit more, you can see in the example what this formula should look right
in the end. Now I think the best thing is if we just go back to our project and see how we can apply
that formula and how we can create such a calendar, right?
So let's do that
and here I am back in the project and as we don't need a calendar in our project actually because we
only have annual data, so we don't need exact dates and we cannot create that because we don't have
daily data
for instance, we could simply create a new table and create that calendar in this table.
So to create a new table in the data model, you'll simply go to the modeling ribbon right here and press
new table, like this
and now you see already that you can write a formula up here in the formula bar.
Now let's first rename that formula and call it calendar maybe, calendar like this
and now after the equals sign,
well we have to write a function
and you remember in the documentation, we saw that this function would be called calendar.
Now let's write
CAL and you can see that we now have three functions that refer or that start with CAL.
Now we will use the second function the calendar function
and by the way I'm navigating through the functions using the up and down arrow keys on the keyboard.
Now as soon as we selected the function that we want to have and this is the calendar function, we can
simply press tab right now
and now we have to define the start date and the end date
and you remember, in the documentation we saw that we have to write date first.
So let's write date, we can find it
so we can scroll down and press tab again and now define the year,
let's say we want to start in 2014,
now define the month, let's say January and the day, let's say the first of January. Let's close the bracket
then and now write a comma and define the end date and to define the end date, we simply have to write
date again,
select it down here and press tab,
now write the year, let's say 2016, the December 31st for instance, close the bracket.
If we now press enter, then we can see that Power BI automatically created a calendar starting in January
2014 and ending in December 2016.
Now that we got that, if you look at the name of that column, you can see that this is called date and
the function value calendar is referring to the whole calendar table that we created right now.
So let's change that by clicking on to date two times and change the name to date
daily maybe, like this and press enter.
Now we got that, we might want to format that column because we have the date and the time in here but
we only need the date actually,
so the first thing we have to do is we have to go to the modeling ribbon and work on that formatting
area and we can cannot do that at the moment because Power BI does not recognize the date in our date
daily column.
So to change that, we can simply click onto the calendar and re-open that to make sure that it now identified
the dates correctly, which it did right now.
So if you click on to a data type right here and select dates, then you can see that this changed already
a little bit but we still have our day in here and I don't want that,
I only want to have the date without the weekday. To change that also, you can go to format right
there, click onto that button, go to date and time and now select the way you want the data to be displayed,
in this case I want to have it like that and now that you can see that we have a column with the formatted
dates already,
this was quite easy actually, right
but we can do more.
Let's create another column by clicking right here
and let's call that column month
like this and if you now write those square brackets like this and write date or D, then you can see
that you can refer to that date daily column,
if you then press tab, then you can select what information you want to retrieve out of that first column.
Now in our case, we want to have the months, so we go down to month, press tab and now press enter
and now we can see that we immediately retrieved the month out of our date column in the first column.
This is great,
let's maybe add one more column just that you see how this works.
So we can add another column, a new column right here
and now call that quarter and you might already know how this works right now. We simply provide the
square brackets, type D, press tab and now move down to quarter, press tab again and press enter
and now you have a list with all the dates by month and by quarter and of course we could play around with
that even more
but as I said for our project, we don't need that type of information.
So the important thing for you at the moment is that you know how this works and that you created your
first DAX formulas right now.
However as we don't need that data in our model, we can simply click right onto that calendar here and
press hide and report view.
You know what this means,
now we cannot see that data in our report and this is fine because we don't need it.
Now that you wrote the first formulas, you might want to know more like what else can we do with that
DAX formulas and we will take a look at that
in another example in the next video.